Lesson 6 - Impact (How engineering managers drive business outcomes) - 45 minutes

Share with sound


Intro - why the focus on business impact (5 minute)
Working with your PM - (10 minutes)
The 3 levels of business impact (25 minutes)
Course summary + survey - 5 (minutes)




🙋
👤
👥
🏢
🌱








🤝








🎯











Slide
We are getting to the last lesson of the course. So far, we did a lesson on each scope - Your people, your team, yourself, and your org. I want to finish with a specific driver - the impact. 
Slide
Some of the impact part will be a by-product of things we already discussed. You’ll be more visible in the org, you’ll be better at handling politics, your team will be more motivated. 
But some parts will not improve unless we address them heads-on. 

If until couple of years ago expectations were about delivering on time what you are told - now, when building is slowly becoming easier and faster, the expectations for Engineering Managers are to actually deliver IMPACT to the business. 
And as we are engineers at heart, transitioning to a ‘business’ mindset is unnatural for many, so we are stuck in the coding world. 
Slide
I surveyed more than 700 EMs:
How involved are you in product decisions and the business side of your company? 

Please write in the chat

Slide 
Among <5 years of experience only 12% are very involved, 38% are somewhat involved, and 50%(!) are not really involved! 
Among EMs with 5+ years of experience the “very involved” number jumps to 20%, which is still much lower than I expected. 

If you want to take yourself and your team to the next level and create more business impact, you need to do better in that area. 

Slide 

Here are some signs you have room to improve there:

Wasted efforts - your team is releasing features that are not used or end up being rolled back.
Invisible impact - your team works hard, but nobody sees or appreciates it 
Hard negotiations - you need to constantly protect your team in roadmap talks, fight for hirings, and so on. 
Constant surprises - there are reorgs and changes you are not part of, priority changes in the roadmap
Disconnected engineers - your engineers don’t really care what happens after they finish a task. For Impact-driven that’s of course a big red sign - but I think that almost in every engineer there is a part that cares about impact. 

But before we dive deeper into the impact part - I want to spend a few minutes talking about your PM
Slide
Working with your PM

I’ve worked with 8 Product Managers in the last decade, and the relationship usually played out in 1 of 3 ways:
PM-led team - The PM was ‘giving orders’, and I was not asked for input.
Engineering-led team - I had the final say, and was always able to push my agenda.
A true partnership - the PM understood the technical side, and took part in the product decisions.
A true partnership is very hard to achieve - I succeeded only twice so far…
First, let’s cover How an imbalance looks like.

An imbalanced relationship happens when one side is ‘stronger’ than the other. It can happen for different reasons:
Years of experience - 10-year-PM > first-time EM
Tenure in the company - 4-year-tenure-PM > 1-year-tenure-EM
Relationships - A founding engineer who is a friend of the CEO > an outside PM hire.
Different personalities, company cultures, and tons of other factors.
In the end, the most common result is 1 of 2:
A PM-led team

I’ve been in 3 such teams earlier in my career. In one of them I’ve been for 2 years, and it looked like this:
The PM talked to the customers alone.
She talked to the internal stakeholders alone.
She sat with her manager, built a roadmap, and told me what we would be working on next.
She told me how long it should take (!)
The results were happy customers (she was good at her job), happy stakeholders, and a frustrated engineering team.
The real problems surfaced only after a while:
People were burning out.
Nobody inside the team knew WHY we were building things. We couldn’t anticipate what would happen in the future, so we wasted tons of time because we prepared for the wrong scenarios.
Our codebase was a mess. No tests, very shallow code reviews, and quick and dirty solutions.
You may think it’s easy to fix. I could just insist on more time and higher standards, right?
People who’ve been in such a situation know the reality. When the PM is the final decision maker, it’s very hard to resist.
You will hear things such as: “This one is really urgent, let’s add the tests later, ok?”. Or “Just make it work in 2-3 days, we’ll have time to refactor it next time we touch this area”.
Yeah, right? Naive me.
After being burned, it led me to the other side of the scale:
An engineering-led team

Some of my recent relationships looked like this:
I set the technical priorities, scope, and estimates. The PM filled the rest of the roadmap with their initiatives.
I made the call on bug fixes and when to refactor. Sometimes I even decided on a whim to do a bigger refactor in the affected area, postponing ‘product’ work.
The team provided high-level designs and estimates that were never challenged.
This is NOT a dream scenario. It resulted in disappointed stakeholders and customers, which misses the whole point of engineering.
It’s very tempting to focus only on our own team, fighting for time to do things ‘in the right way’. 
Technical Debt is less scary than getting out of business - optimizing code or scaling up components that may or may not be used is sticking our heads in the sand. 
(From Leading Snowflakes)
You can’t be satisfied with beautiful code and scalable systems. If your PM is not up to the task - you have to take a deep breath and just do the PM work yourself.
A fake balanced team
In this type of ‘balanced’ relationship, each side has its own responsibilities. You get your tech debt time and the PM doesn’t bother you, and you don’t have a say in the product roadmap. I’ll tell you WHAT, and you’ll decide HOW.

In the long run, it’ll fail.
A much better option is for every technical initiative to be on the roadmap, and have a product-related justification. A single roadmap for the team that both of you agree on.
An article with practical tips on how to achieve that: https://newsletter.manager.dev/p/how-to-implement-20-for-tech-debt-

The ability of the PM to defend the technical work against their own manager is a huge force multiplier for the team. Otherwise, when your team will be called ‘slow’ in a meeting you don’t attend - the team will just be thrown under the bus.
Building a true partnership - tips for EMs
There IS a way to make that balance work. In my experience, it’s reached when both sides want to make the right decision for the company.
Not the team
Not the customers.
Not other stakeholders.
The long-term success of the company.

2 main tips on how to get there:
1. Help your PM become tech-oriented
If your PM doesn’t have a technical background, it’s up to you to bring him up to speed. Spend the time to explain the benefits of ‘purely technical’ tasks.
2. Become a product-oriented EM
The next step is for you to care about the business - which is everything we just discussed :) 
You don’t have the privilege to not care about the business!
When you understand the business and feel closer to the customers and other departments of the company, it’ll be much harder to bury your head in the sand and focus only on technical excellence.
It’s part of your job to learn about the Product Management world. How it works, what’s the best practices, and what are the main challenges.
It will allow you to sympathize with your PM, understand the reasons behind his decisions, but also challenge him and suggest new ways of doing things.
I highly suggest Marty Cagan’s books, starting with ‘Inspired’. 
4. Talk about responsibilities 
It can be as simple as writing down all the possible responsibilities, and each side saying where on the EM<->PM graph it lies. You’ll be surprised by the differences of opinion...

John Cutler wrote a great article about such an exercise.





Slide 

Understand how the company operates (by that it's everything that adds up to profitability) — and ask what is the Success Definition of the business — then check how does your work contribute to this.

To understand that, ones need to go through 3 layers:

First, there is your Product. Your customers, The customers pains, usage, features. Understanding your product better provides immediate impact.

Then, you have your business economics. Revenue, ARR, gross, net profit. Understanding who pays your salary. You know when excellent engineers and EMs are laid off? When they don’t contribute to the business side (repeating that point). 

Understanding how you are connected to the bigger picture - how does your team bring money to your company? And yes - it’s relevant for any team. Even a team that improves developer productivity can be connected to the bottom line. 

Last, you have your company’s domain / industry. What are the trends? What are the competitors doing? What’s everyone excited about? What is the environment your startup operates in? 

We’ll talk in a few minutes about how your PM fits in - this is not a takeover of their job.


Slide

I want you to think for a second about which parts you are missing. We will now dive deeper into all 3 - In each part, I will share with you the 3 levels you can achieve to create more impact. 

Level 1 is a very quick win. 
Level 2 is more advanced, and requires some work. 
Level 3 is for pros :) 

My goal is to help you ‘rise’ on level in any of the three. If if it’s from 0 to 1. 

I know the course is loaded with content and ideas - my suggestions it to be just a couple that resonated from this lesson, focus on just 1 level in one part.

Don’t let the amount of ideas to overwhelm you, I know I already shared tons of things you COULD do, and I’m just adding more and more. This is the downside of a super condensed course :) 

You will be able to access all of them in the Pulse app. 

I suggest listening and picking just 1 that resonates the most for your situation. 

Let’s start with the product.

Slide 

Product

Level 1 - having access to the metrics. MixPanel, Amplitude, Posthog or whatever product you use. Have dashboard that shows usage over time, that your team can access too. Very simple, and not only product managers should do. 

This is a lesson I learned the hard way. 
At my last company, we built tools for drone pilots flying over crop fields. One day, ops told us pilots were wasting time driving between fields. So we built a Google Maps-based route planner, linked directly to their phones.
We launched it. Announced it. Moved on.
Two months later, I checked the metrics: only six pilots had used it.
Turns out, ops had mentioned it once. They forgot.
We tried again - this time with a personal message to each pilot. Over 60 started using it.
Having those metrics available is the difference between ‘launch’ and ‘land’. 
Launching is the fun part for engineers - solving a problem, writing code. Landing is boring and non technical - But without Landing, your Launch is useless. “If you put code in production and no one uses it, does it still have an impact?”

This is a common way to look at product releases in Meta and other BigTech companies. I’ll share in the summary a link to an amazing article by a principal engineer from Amazon and Google - and how he changed that culture. 
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/launching-versus-landing-carlos-arguelles-vc2jc/

Since that incident with the day planning feature, a feature is not finished when a code is in production. together with the engineer that led it, we monitor the usage, and see if we achieved our goals. You release? Schedule a meeting a week or 2 into the future to look at the data.

Slide 

Level 2 - async watching of users. In almost every company there are session recordings, where you can actually see how your users behave (and if not - super easy to implement). Usually PMs watch it - but nothing stops engineers from doing so. There is a lot of noise - so this level is harder, and requires more from you. Here’s a quick way to do it: start with a ‘movie time’ once a month, 30 minutes where you watch recordings together. For the first couple of times, prepare those in advance - search for recordings relevant to your features. Later on, encourage the engineers to discover the platform. You can get interesting results with filters. 

Slide 
Level 2+ - still level 2, but a bit more advanced. 
How many of you actually watch zoom recordings? 
Watching session recordings from customer, from discovery meetings PMs are doing. This one takes effort. If you just send Zoom links of 1-hour conversations, nobody in your team will watch it (although I recommend you do - at 2X speed). 3 years ago, I started to take those videos, and actually cut the relevant parts, and add them to tickets for more context (or just send to the team to see).

This was a ton of effort - but now with AI it’s so easy! You can automatically get a transcript connected to timestamps, input it to LLMs and get the relevant slices best on your query. 

I recently started to use a tool called fathom.video - which is 100% free, records your meetings, provides a summary, and let’s you ask questions about that meetings! 

Slide 
Level 3 - are you ready for it? I’m sure you know what’s coming next… Write your guesses in the chat :)

Actually talking with customers. There is a reason this level is for pros only - most organizations are just not built in a way that encourages this. There are many layers between engineers and customers. 

I had to drive 10 hours for such a meeting (I’ll share that story in a second), but there are much simpler ways:

Piggyback on existing meetings - Ask to silently join customer discovery calls run by PMs, sales, or CS. Promise not to interrupt - just learn. If you have a question, you can just send your contact in Slack during that meeting.
Reach out via Support - find a user who recently complained, or a customer ticket you fixed. You’ll be surprised how receptive customers can be. Recently, I had a good experience in Supabase. I had a bug, and reached to support, they told me they escalated. Then an engineer fixed it, and reached back, asking if there was anything else I need. If they offered to jump on a call to understand my usage - I would have happily agreed. Words both in B2C and B2B!
Work with CS to identify a power user. Send a short, respectful email:
 ‘I’m an engineer on the team that built X — I’d love 15 minutes to learn how we can make it better for you.”. CS teams are often delighted when engineers take this initiative, because the usual mindset from engineers is “don’t waste my time with useless meetings”.

In the 2nd and 3rd methods, we go for the edges - the people who either love us, or need us but are annoyed. Those are the people are already invested in our product, so they won’t need much convincing to jump on a short call. If someone opens a ticket - it means they need our product. 

Ok so how I ended up driving 10 hours to such a meeting.

In my last company, it took me 3 years to actually go visit a customer. Our customers are farmers in the United states, so I had to fly across the ocean. And the farmers are super busy, and don’t really want to talk to engineers…

Our CS team got me in touch with one of them using the 3rd method - who was really enthusiastic about one of our latest releases. They mentioned that an in-person meeting would be more effective, as usually in Zoom he turns the camera off and doesn’t have a lot of patience. So I drove 10 hours each way from our office in Indiana to that customer in Iowa, for a 1 hour meeting - and let me tell you, it was so worth it! 

I saw how he used our app in real life - on an ipad! Turns out in one of the critical flows, he jumps app to another app on the ipad to get some data, and returns to ours. That’s not something we knew. I asked about it, and he mentioned it’s very annoying but he got used to it.
There was a question I asked that he couldn’t answer - so he just called an intern in to our office - and turned out that intern was a super enthusiastic user, who of course is never invited to Zoom calls because he is not senior enough. 

But again, a Zoom meeting is better than nothing. 

Slide 


You should have some ‘excuse’ for the conversation, ideally feature you just released, or a big project you are planning. Use that as a starter - but just explore and be really curious. Build a connection. 
Here are 3 questions you can start with:

Feature context: “How do you currently solve X?” 
Usability feedback: “Can you show me how you’d use this new flow?”
Pain validation: “What’s the most frustrating part of your workflow right now?”


Slide.

Ok, summing Product:

Level 1 - Just understand the usage. Have an easy way for everyone to see their impact. You probably have an existing tool - and if not many are easy to implement. Action: your engineers can see product usage metrics. 
Level 2 - Watch customer behaviour, whether from session recordings or discovery calls. Action: watch at least one session recording with your team. 
Level 3 - Go talk to customers. Create connection with them, and you’ll understand everything much better. Action: have at least 1 conversion with a customer. 

Understanding your customers, their pains, and your product better, is the basis of your influence. Yes, it takes some effort - but even just doing all of it once, can create a lasting effect. 

Next, we go to 

Slide 
Business

Level 1 - Starting the same - just have access to the business metrics for your team. 

There are tons of business metrics (a slide with tons of business metrics thrown around).
Still, at least the basics.

A very simple framework is the AARRR one:
Acquisition - how many customers are joining every month? Where are they coming from (so you’ll know where the money lies). 
Activation - what is your ‘activation’? Give examples from multiple companies. If you are in a small company and it’s not defined - at least what your product tries to make them do.
Retention - what is your retention and churn? How many users drop of? Do you know why the drop of? 
Revenue - what’s your revenue? Is it according to the goals?
Referall - are your users sharing the product? What percentage of users is coming from referlaalls ?
You can use a single dashboard:





And if you are at a very small company or don’t have access to nice dashboard - it became super easy to just use Claude directly connected to the DB, to ask a question and it will write SQL for you. 


Slide 

Level 2 - connect the business metrics to your team - distill the ones that are relevant. 

This is really where the Impact of your team part start to go up.

Having a basic access is a good start - as it sparks conversations, and changes the mindset. People like numbers. If they see something drops, they are curious as to why. 

Then will come the obvious question - ok, but what metrics are we influencing? It’s a natural next step your team will probably push you themselves.

So you have the company’s view, and you next work to create something that is more relevant to your team. For examples, you can connect to the pure product metrics, and see how it influences other metrics. So let’s say you released a new feature. You can measure the retention before it was released, and after. Or the retention of people who used, vs the ones who don’t. 

Since business metrics are typically trailing metrics, meaning it takes time for them to move, finding a way to connect features to business impact is a challenge. It is also one of the highest-leverage problems to solve.

Integrating a system like StatSig or Posthog is a low cost way to solve it. Release experiments with feature flags and attribution, and get statistically significant results on the trailing metrics. Both have very generous free tiers.

Another very simple action item here is to find the ‘general manager’, the manager that owns the P&L (profit and loss) for the unit of business you are closely connected to. They often do not have GM in their title, in a small startup it might be the CEO. Just go talk to them - understand what they care about, and how you are connected to it. Sometimes those people are not technical, and you can help them to start measuring those things.

Slide 

Level 3 - Influence the business metrics, and use them in arguments. 
So after your team understand where you company stands and what you focus on, and understand what your team’s part in it - the next stage if for you and your engineers to start using those business terms and metrics in arguments. 

Back to my drone pilots story. 
My company’s gross margin was less than 50%. This means for every dollar our customers paid us, we got less than 50 cents - as we need to pay the drone pilots to actually go fly the drones and take images. 

We had a goal of increasing it to 60%. Of course, we don’t want to pay the drone pilots less - otherwise they’ll leave. So what if we can help them fly more fields per day, and we split the gains? So if they are used to 10 fields per day we improve the software and they’ll be able to do 15 - and we’ll pay a bit less for each field, but they’ll still take more money home. 

Only that super small feature of helping them to plan their route improved the outcome of the pilots who used it by 11%! 

I started to use that ‘gross margin’ in conversations. I had a PM who gave in to stakeholder demand. The operations team wanted features that make it easier for them to do their work, saving them 20-30 minutes a day - taking us 2 months. The impact on the bottom line? Zero!

When are getting used to thinking in business terms, there is no way to go back. You start to question every part of your work - which is a great thing.

Here’s another example from Flo, the women's health unicorn. 

At first, they had just the free version and the Premium version. Then, in addition to basic Premium, they began selling a Family plan, where you can add up to 5 members to your plan and they all get Premium access.
As everything was hard-coded, it took us 2 weeks to create a new package and wire all the features to be part of a given subscription. Then the business wanted to create more and more packages to experiment with - and we figured out it was time to scale our operations and reduce engineering efforts by platformization.


BUT, if you talk business impact… As an EM in Flo shared with me:


In the end, we reduced the time it takes to create a new Tier with various features to 5 mins, down from initial ~2 weeks. We have saved $125k/year by making the package creation self-service and dynamic.

When you tell senior leaders ‘we need time to create better infrastructure, or ‘create a platform’’ - sometimes they’ll just throw you down the stairs. 
When you say - Give me a month to create a better platform - you’ll never get it. When you say “It’s going to save us $125K a year” - that’s a difference story. 

Slide 

Summing up the business:
Level 1 - having access to the business metrics. Action: have a dashboard they can access.
Level 2 - connect your team’s work to the business metrics. Action: find the GM of the area most relevant to your team and have a short 1:1 conversation. 
Level 3 - Influence the business metrics. Action: Use that business metric at least once while trying to push for your agenda. 

Even getting to level one, opens a lot of conversations and opportunities. If you start speaking the business language, you’ll see how people will start to treat you differently. You are no longer just that ‘engineer who turned to a manager’, you are also part of the business team. 

Slide 

The last part is understanding your company’s domain. 

Resola AI (Marketing Tech)
EPM (East Penn Manufacturing, Batteries)
TELUS Agriculture & Consumer Goods (AgTech)
Carol srl (Telemedicine)
Flo (Women’s Health App) 
Carefull (Fintech - Financial Safety)
SoFi (Consumer Fintech)
Kleer (Finance-as-a-Service platform)
EPAM (Software Engineering Services) + GlobalLogic (Product Engineering Services)

This one is the hardest to do, as it doesn’t translate well between companies. I’m talking about knowledge that is very specific to your domain - Cyber, Fintech, Adtech, HRtech, Social Network, Marketplace, and so on.

Engineering managers are rarely specialized in domains, we can move between companies in any industry without any problem - as we are just coding right? We depend on PMs and internal stakeholders with industry backgrounds to help us understand the domain better. 

This is a mistake - as we are not taken seriously.
 
Slide 

Level 1 - passive knowledge 
Level 0 here is to write down words you don’t understand and actually understand them. Nothing is as annoying as explaining multiple times an industry term. It makes people feel condescending, reminding them unnecessarily that you are not one of them. 

There are 2 main approaches for it:
The old fashioned one. 
Articles 
Newsletters 
Podcasts
Books - Agriculture: A Very Short Introduction.

Have an LLM tutor. For many fields, you can build your LLM tutor. Frame them as an expert instructor in e.g. Fintech. Ask them to give you guidance on how to study, teach, write tests for you, etc.

Just have some knowledge. You don’t need to spend much time on it, even 10-15 minutes a week is great. Personally, I believe this knowledge is not ‘wasted’ - it both makes you a smarter human being, and much better at current work. 

Slide 

Level 2 - share that knowledge.
It doesn’t have to be with the whole company. You can start with your peers - any article you feel relevant, you can share your main takeaways and share a link.

In my company, we had a Slack channel with all the Engineering Managers in PMs. I was the most active member there, sharing articles, ideas, podcasts. Even if people don’t react - it caused people to start conversations with me, and become a bit more curious. 

As you gain some confidence, you can send it in a bigger level, and it’s a great opener for conversations with outside stakeholders. They’ll love to talk about their area of expertise when they see you are serious.  

Michal’s story:

I have a friend who was an Engineeering Manager in Toptal but now he switched to Insurrance company (based in the US). He was overwhelmed by US laws, different standards, different laws for each state etc.

When he was onboarding he fully documented his journey through completely new domain for him. He shared that with the organisation and it became the part of onboarding process for technical employees.

Sharing is caring, it makes others's life easier

Slide 

Level 3 - Become a Domain Insider

Ok this one really is hard - but I don’t advice anything I haven't tried myself :) 

There are 2 main methods I suggest - either learning deeper, or going extreme with dogfooding - and if you can do it together even better.

The first 2 levels is how an outsider learns about the industry. But the real change happens when you are an insider. 

2 years ago, I’ve read a book about the story of Continental’s airline CEO, who transformed it from the worst airline to the best. One idea stuck with me - he went and got a commercial pilot’s license, so he could speak the same language as the pilots, and understand them better. 

Slide 

As I shared - my company flew drones over fields, took images, analyze, and provide insights to the farmers. My team was responsible for the operations tools to the pilots - the app to fly the drone, an app to schedule the flights, an app to upload the images and so on. 

So I decided to experience first hand how our apps are used. I got a commercial drone pilot license from the FAA in the US. During the preparation, I spent some time with our operations team (my main customers), and it was a great opportunity to bond. Then I went and did a full day in the field as a drone pilot - real flights for our customers. 

Going back to the product part - this really helped me understand better the usage. Even small things like battery power for the laptops, and having hard time seeing things on the screen because of the sun.

Go extreme with DogFooding. 

Uber’s CPO spends a day each month driving Uber! If he can find the time, so can you.
https://www.lennysnewsletter.com/p/why-ubers-cpo-delivers-food-on-weekends-sachin-kansal


Slide 

Provide ideas in different industries. Yes, they take more time, but your company might be happy to invest in you.

Carefull (Fintech - Financial Safety) - Sebastian
Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE): get the CFE credential to deepen expertise in fraud detection and financial crimes prevention. Here’s a short one.


Dogfooding as a Family Caregiver: set up Carefull monitoring for a senior family member’s accounts (with their permission) or assist a friend in onboarding their elderly parent. 
Kleer (Finance-as-a-Service platform) - Christina
Management Accounting Credential: Obtain a Certified Management Accountant (CMA) certification or similar finance credential.


Finance Team Rotation: Spend time with Kleer’s own financial advisory or support team. Sitting in on virtual advisory sessions or customer support calls.
SoFi (Consumer Fintech) - Manoj
Financial Domain Training: Eenroll in a fintech leadership program or obtain a certification in financial planning or risk management (for example, a Certified Financial Risk Manager (FRM) or a short FinTech Essentials course). Here’s a short beginner course from coursera. 


SoFi Customer Experiments: use SoFi for all personal financial needs for a period-– refinancing a small loan through SoFi, using only SoFi bank accounts/cards, investing via SoFi’s platform, even trying insurance or other products - whatever makes sense. 
TELUS Agriculture & Consumer Goods (AgTech) - Andy
Supply Chain/Agribusiness Certification: Getting certified in agriculture or supply chain management. For example, a Certified Supply Chain Professional (CSCP) credential (here’s a short course about it).


On-Farm Immersion: Spend time on the farm and in distribution centers. Arrange to work alongside a farmer using TELUS’s farm management software during periods like planting or harvest. It can be quite an experience :) 

EPM (East Penn Manufacturing, Batteries) - Dave
Lean Six Sigma Black Belt: Achieve a Lean Six Sigma Black Belt certification to master process improvement and quality control in manufacturing. Here’s a free one by Coursera.
Factory Floor Immersion: Do an “extreme” dogfooding by working several shifts on the battery assembly line or in the recycling plant. 
Flo (Women’s Health App) - Eugene
Healthcare & Data Privacy Education: Enroll in a professional course or certification related to digital health. For example, a Certified Health Information Manager or a short Women’s Health Informatics program. 


Clinic and Community Collaboration: you can volunteer or shadow in a gynecology clinic or a fertility center that encourages patients to use apps like Flo, and observe how they are using it.  
Carol srl (Telemedicine) - Pietro
Healthcare IT/Compliance Certification: get a certification such as Certified Professional in Healthcare Information & Management Systems (CPHIMS) or a local telemedicine accreditation. 


Shadow Patients and Doctors: Do a thorough dogfooding of the Carol platform from both key user perspectives. register as a patient (with some real health concern) and go through the entire process: booking a video consultation, meeting a doctor virtually, getting an e-prescription, and arranging a medicine delivery. You could also shadow a doctor who uses Carol - observing how exactly they manage it.
Resola AI (Marketing Tech) 
Advanced Marketing Certification: Earn a specialized certification in AI-driven marketing or analytics (e.g. a generative AI marketing course or Google Marketing Analytics certificate) to deepen domain expertise. Here’s an example I found.
Extreme Dogfooding Campaign: Engage in “extreme dogfooding” by running a full end-to-end marketing campaign for a client (or some friend’s project) entirely using Resola’s platform. 
EPAM (Software Engineering Services) + GlobalLogic (Product Engineering Services) Yulia and Yulia
A services company is a bit more complex. 
In my opinion they are 2 ways to go about it:
If your team serves some main clients/industries, you can do imagine you work for that industry and act accordingly (with a certification, dogfooding, and so on). 
If you have a lot of different projects and a changing landscape, I would suggest to become an insider of the services domain. Meaning to get deeper and understand the shift of how services companies are changing - go to meetup and conferences, interview other companies, share internal knowledge and so on.
Slide 

And you can only connect the dots going backward - I can’t promise where it’ll help you, I just know it helped me. 

Slide 

Summing up the business:
Level 1 - have a better understand of industry-specific terms. Action: spend 5 minutes talking to ChatGPT about your industry, ask it to be your instructor. 
Level 2 - share industry knowledge. Find one great article and send it in a channel with your peers. 
Level 3 - become a domain insider. Find a single action you can take to better understand the life of people in your company’s industry. It doesn’t have to be directly tied to your customers! 


Slide 

Almost done. I know that was a TON of info to take in. I tried to make it as practical as I can.

To sum it up: In 2025, to become a great Engineering Manager you have to start driving business impact. 
To do that you need to:
Understand your product and customers
Understand your business economics 
Understand your company’s industry 

It all starts with better knowledge - that leads to better ideas, better arguments, better action. 




Course summary 

That was intense, we covered a lot of material. 

Lesson 1: The 3 drivers, mapping your engineers to them, standup feedback
Lesson 2: Your team, team meetings, team focus days and the knowledge mapping method. 
Lesson 3: Your own growth - about the victim trap, and getting back to hands on 
Lesson 4: Your org - the 3 levels of positioning, being taken seriously and 3 persuasion methods 
Lesson 5: We covered your dilemmas 
Lesson 6: We just talked about the 3 levels of business impact - the product, the econonimcs and the industry. 


As I shared in the beginning - my goal was to give you a 10/10 experience. We’ve put more than a hundred hours preparing the content, and building the app. 

And I really hope you took at least one thing you can change today. We are on Maven and they are really picky about course quality etc. we are just getting started and your 10/10 will make a HUGE difference for us, with your feedback and your ratings — you'll help many engineering managers to find the course on the platform and grow their careers


I really want to improve this course going forward - so I would welcome any feedback or thought, there is a private section in the survey. 


Before we switch to the last Q&A - I would really appreciate if you could spend 2 minutes providing an honest review for the course right now, we sent the link in the chat. It will help me a lot for future cohorts!


