Lesson 3 - Self - 40 minutes
Presentation (WIP): https://www.canva.com/design/DAGw_IISBTE/ZoF1e7i2h56J_zTxf6A9Tg


Why being an EM is so hard - 5 minutes
Filling the EM Grid - 15 minutes
The Victim Trap - 10 minutes
The Death of the hands-on EM - 10 minutes



🙋
👤
👥
🏢
🌱








🤝








🎯










A quick recap of lessons 1 and 2 (30 seconds). 

Intro - why we have the best and the hardest jobs - 5 minutes

Why an EMs job is so hard?

LLM coding agents help more people understand that. 

Slide. 

Let’s assume coding agents will truly reach the level of a mid-level engineer in a couple of years. Not just for new and basic apps, but truly - understanding multiple repos, not making a mess, creating maintainable code, and so on.
Even if that’ll happen - I’m in the camp that believes that there will still be someone technical to manage those agents, create guidelines, and deal with incidents when they happen (and they will).
Slide
There is a lot of conversations about a software engineer should become an ‘agent team managers’. Everyone who managed a team knows how wrong is that :) 
Slide
The reality is that writing code has never been the toughest part of our jobs:The outcome of the software engineering org is not just ‘working code’. It’s solving a problem for the customers.
In your time as an EM, the expectations from you are exactly those - get your head up from only writing code. 

Slide

You are expected to:
Develop your people
Understand the business side
Make sure the whole team delivers, including everything it entails
Hire, Fire
Deal with stakeholders
Prioritize 
And slowly, also:
Influence other teams 
Make an impact in the org level 

Slide
So this is often how EMs end their days. 
BUT, because of all of that, our job is super complex, and touches on many areas. 
And while LLMs can help in many different parts, the core of our job will stay. 

Slide

Can you please write in the chat, in your approximation, what % of time are you ‘free’ to work on things YOU want?

Slide

Yesterday we discussed the drivers - Growth, Impact, Connection. 
Today, I want to add the columns of scope - to create the EM Grid. 

We have 4 scopes - your, your people, your team, your org.

This GRID is a very helpful tool to visualize where you still have space to grow. 

Slide 

Most overwhelmed EMs, spend time on the team - and mainly the impact the team makes, which is the basic expectations. All energy is spent on focusing on what we need to deliver. 

Slide 

Some EMs, more experienced, find the time to focus on their people too - mentor them, help them create impact and get promoted, and so on. 

That’s why the first lesson was about those 2 parts - as it relates to EVERYONE, and is table stakes - we need to make sure how team and people are in a good position to succeed.

Slide 

Today, we will focus on YOU and the organization, the most neglected areas. 

We wil use the EM grid. What I like about the drivers, is that in addition to the motivation part, it can also be around change and work, where do you put your energy. 


Slide

But first, I want to have a baseline of where your time is currently spent. We already talked a lot about activities, both teams and things you can do for individuals. Now, I want you to see where your time is actually spent, across the 3 drivers, and across scope.

Now, our goal is now to understand YOUR blind spot - where you are not putting enough energy. It’s not like everything should be ‘filled’ every week, but if you consistently have blank cells - it’s a sign you may have some quick wins there. 

Here’s an example from a typical week I had at my previous job. 

Slide

Go over various meetings 
.
Different meeting can be in different parts. 
A 1:1 with a person can be all 3 drivers, depending what you talked about. PErsonal things, their growth, maybe you helped them solve something which is more on the impact side.

A retrospective can be growth for the team.

A daily can also be a connection or impact or useless - depending how you do it :)
>

Slide 

Let’s now open a typical week in the past, last week, or the one before, and qualify them. 

I want you to open the link: 

App.manager.dev

Let’s take 5 minutes to fill in that snapshot. If you have any questions about activities, fire away. And if you don’t work closely with the calendar - try to do it from memory, look at the last few weeks, it doesn’t have to be too accurate. 


Is it clear what you need to do in these 5 minutes? (for people who lost their focus)


—--

So now you should have a map of where your energy and time is going. If I had to guess - for most of you it would be about team impact, the day to day job, and about the individuals. 

Slide

And if we go back to the beginning of the lesson, there are so many different things we are expecting to do, it’s hard to exit survival mode, and start thinking about growing ourselves and influencing the org. 

When I do this exercise with EMs, I face a lot of resistance, exactly due to the factors we discussed - I don’t have the time. If I start focusing on other things, critical things will suffer.

Slide

And the question becomes - 
 How can I Do it WITHOUT working more hours?

Slide 

Yes, it’s hard. But IT IS possible - and I talk together about you and the org because that’s how you grow. 

I had a conversation with a senior manager in a big org. He talked about how hard was the promotion from senior to staff engineer - as many engineers just can’t find the time. He liked telling them - it’s part of the challenge, you need to find a way to do more with the same time - OR, temporary spend a bit more time for high leverage tasks.

My opinion is that it’s totally possible without adding additional time - I mostly worked 40-50 hour weeks. 

I believe the bigger challenge is the mentality. 

Slide 

My answer is a bit complex, and it involved the Victim trap:

Let’s start with a short story. One Thursday evening, my PM dropped this bomb in a big Slack channel:



I was absolutely furious. There was no way we could fix everything without burning the entire weekend. And for what? The delays weren’t my fault - he kept increasing the scope with zero compromises.

And even worse - how could he promise such a thing without consulting me???

I’ve had enough. I started to write an angry message to my manager, the PM, and the VP of product. And then I stopped for a second. I realized I’d fallen into the Dreaded Drama Triangle trap. Again.

Slide 

The Drama Triangle is a model that explains how people fall into one of three roles during conflict or stressful situations:
Victim
Villain
Hero.

A nice visualization that sums it up, from this video:



1. Victim
The Victim feels powerless and believes that life is happening to them. They see themselves as at the mercy of external circumstances, people, or conditions, for example:

Blaming external factors: "The economy is so bad, there’s no way I can find a job now."
Feeling stuck: "I can’t do anything about this deadline because the PM keeps changing their mind and adding features."


2. Villain
The Villain is what the victim is pointing fingers at, what they believe causes all their problems. For example:

"I really messed up that presentation, I knew I should have prepared more." (self-blame)
"We didn’t meet the deadline because the PM kept increasing the scope." (blaming others)
"The management team is completely out of touch" (blaming groups)

The Victim often waits for someone (like the Hero) to rescue them, reinforcing their lack of power.


3. Hero
The “Hero” provides relief to the victim, by offering temporary solutions. A hero can be another person or a behavior. For example:

When you complain to your manager, and they tell you: “You are right, I don’t know what the PM thought. I’ll deal with it myself”.
You might ‘hero’ yourself by completely ignoring the issue - mindlessly scrolling social media, binge-watching TV, or indulging in food or drinks.

In reality, there are many situations where we feel victims:
An overpromising PM - In the story that opened, I was the Victim, feeling powerless and angry by the PM’s decision to over-promise without consulting me. The PM became the Villain I blamed. My manager was the Hero, someone I wanted to validate my frustration and “shield” me from the Villain.
Result: This mindset prevented me from actually resolving the issue, and kept the team in an endless reactive loop.
Being told your team is not working hard enough - You sit down for a 1:1 with your manager, and they start by immediately telling you: “During the last executive meeting the CEO said he feels your department is not working hard enough”.
That’s one of the most frustrating experiences as a manager. It’s so easy to fall into the victim mindset, blaming the CEO.
When your spouse asks you about work, you tell them: “Our CEO is so disconnected, it’s unbelievable! I’m so sick of being told we need to work harder”. She’ll of course reinforce your frustration (acting as your ‘hero’).
Result: your team will continue to be perceived as ‘slacking off’, hurting both you and the future prospects of your engineers.
An underperforming engineer:
You feel a developer on your team is not up to the required level. He takes very long to complete tasks, doesn’t show initiative, and doesn’t seem to improve. You had multiple conversations with him, telling him what you expect, but nothing changed.
You sit for lunch with one of your peers, and tell her: “I’m so tired with Sean, why didn’t the previous manager fire him? Now I’m stuck with him”.
Result: the root cause is never fixed, and everyone suffers - you, Sean, and the rest of the team.

For me, getting out of that victim mindset boils down to 3 things:

Recognize you are in a victim mindset
This one took a while, but now I notice quite immediately. I try to understand not only who/what is the villain, but also who/what is the hero I’m going to turn to to get rid of my frustration.

Right before sending that Slack message to my manager and the VP Product, I recognized I’d fallen again into the victim trap.

Try VERY hard to see their side.
The next step is even harder - try to imagine the “villain’s” point of view.

I started to think, why did my PM promise that it would be an impossible deadline? who put pressure on him?

Instead of sending that angry message to my manager and the VP Product, I gave the PM a phone call. I calmly asked about that message, what made him do it, and why he didn’t first talk with me.

He then shared how pressured he was in the last couple of weeks, with 3 different executives bugging him every day about that release, putting impossible demands and expecting him to solve it magically.

He apologized for not discussing it with me before the reply. When I told him it’s not easy fixes, he asked me what I think we should do now.

Put your attention on the outcome, not the problem

The more you focus on the problem, the bigger it becomes in your mind, and the more frustrated you become.

Sometimes if you just focus on the outcome you want, the problem disappears. The outcome I wanted was to reduce the pressure from my team and the PM.

I offered my PM to write a message in the channel myself. I wrote that after some investigation we understand that the changes are harder than we anticipated. I explained we want to release a high-quality solution, and we will do it by Wednesday next week. I took some of the heat myself, apologizing for the delay.

Slide

As a newly promoted engineering manager, I remember that I often said the phrase: “That’s important, I wish somebody would finally do something about it!”. I was talking about things outside of my classic responsibility.
Once I learned about the victim->creator transformation, I just started to do many of those things myself (or at least push them along). I complained A LOT less. Instead of being stuck in my own frustration, I try much harder to improve every part of the company - and in some cases, it actually worked!
That shift of mindset was critical in both of my promotions, and I’m sure will help me a lot for the rest of my career (and life).



Slide

So to go back to the initial resistance - it’s easy to complain and say you don’t have time, that everything depends on you, that maybe in a few months. That it’s not your fault the expectations are unrealistic. 

I challenge you to break out of that mode, and think how you CAN do some change. 

You can start with baby steps. What blank cell did you have in the grid? Let’s put just 30 minutes today. 

Let’s move one of the responsibilities to a suitable person, as we discussed in the lesson. A trick I used with the R&D grooming is to let the person be responsible, but not cancel that meeting! She knew I was not coming there, and everyone else knew all the department leadership were there. So I have an hour every 2 weeks that was a ‘gift’. 

Slide

And now I want to finish the ‘Self’ lesson with a short discussion about hands-on work. 

Before we start - what percentage of time are you writing code (or doing hands on work if you are in data/qa/etc domains)?

There are 2 types of engineering managers:
Super hands-on - they take tasks in every sprint, know the codebase, and help the team fix hard bugs.
Full-time managers - attending meetings all day, having 1:1s, zero coding time.
The sad truth is that almost all of us start from type 1, and slowly become type 2:




I’ve been through that transition twice. When you are first promoted, you are close to the code. You were responsible for big parts of the codebase, and it’s easy to stay a part of the sprint.

For the first couple of years, you code 30-70% of your time, with a slow decrease as your team grows.
Then comes a sprint where you just have too many things. Tons of meetings, a new project you are leading, the usual stuff. So for the first time, you decide to not take on any coding task.

One sprint becomes 2, then 5, then 10. Suddenly a year went by and you barely opened your IDE. Now it’s not a question of having no time - it’s a habit you have lost. Even the most busy engineering managers can find 2-3 hours a week to do some coding.

Getting back into the game is hard. You tell yourself “I can’t do anything useful in 2 hours. I’ll get into the zone and I will be distracted anyway. Better go over that document one more time”.

And then comes AI. 

You can much easier enter a new codebase, fix a bug, or create some internal tool. 

I believe deep to my bones that right now, there is no more place for engineering manager who don’t create at least a little. It is CRUCIAL both for the self->growth and self->Impact parts. 

I’m not talking necessarily as being part of the sprint, and doing things others will depend upon.

But on staying relevant, being part of the conversation. 

Those of you who haven’t tried vibe coding something don’t know the absolute feeling of frustration, how you start cursing the AI. It’s a new way of programming. 

My super strong recommendation is to try to do at least something small in at least one of 3 categories every quarter. 2-3 hours on each - you can probably do it all in a day:
Coding agent - Cursor/Claude Code. This changes all the time, but currently Claude Code is leading. 
No code - Lovable, Bolt, Base44, Replit and so on. Something simple, an internal app, maybe try to connect to your own backend. Just so see where they are. I recently wrote an article about 10 ideas for internal tools you can build, we will send you the link. https://newsletter.manager.dev/p/10-simple-internal-tools-any-em-can
Automation - N8n, string. Has a lot of potential. Simple use case - you can create a bot for yourself where you write any notes you want for yourself in Slack and it saves them using some LLM logic. Like saving notes for the next 1:1, or by projects, or whatever - without context switches for you. 

If your barrier is that you never tried - I would be happy to assist with ideating, or any problem you have, seriously, feel free to send me an email. 



Summing up:

I’ve talked about:
Why being EM is hard, but why also it’s a great time for us, and introduced the EM grid
We went over the grid and understood where are your blind spots
We talked about the victim trap it’s so easy to fall into and how to avoid it
We’ve talked about the death of the hands on EM, and how to get back to the game. 


Let’s take a 5 minute break and come back to the same link for the 4th lesson
