Lesson 5 - Putting it in practice (with mental models) - 40 minutes 

Raw First Draft 

Lesson 5  (I listed below raw thought on how it may look like in practise):

I imagine it to start with a short 5-10mins lightning intro about WHY it's important to meta-observe your own thoughts and feelings.
Then to do practice of discussing dilemmas, but in structured way using template AND/OR assessing decisions from the past

Start by explaining my definition of super-manager / super-intelligence.

I got the inspiration for how to define my endgame from the short story by Ted Chiang (Understand). — The superintelligent individual in this book had an amazing opportunity to fully understand own thoughts, own feelings, emotions, and all the changes that happened in our brain.

Dilemmas template to go through each one:
- Dilemma definition
- What we need to decide on
- Why we need to decide
- CHECKS or ACTIONS from lessons we had — (I can do this before the lesson so for each dilemma we have listed key things from previous lessons to put into practice, in my mind it's like 2-3 action or checks from previous lessons to help with a given dilemma)
	- We might not reveal what we thought of and ask people for their takes (but it depends on group dynamic and/or number of people)
	- Lesson X: Do X and Y before assessing possibilities
- Possibilities
- Decision
- Communication Constraints


First Lightning Talk (~5mins) — Intro to Mental Models & Decision Making

When I was an engineer I had design patterns, code covered with tests

I could easily measure performance, and fix engineering problems (with little help from stack overflow)

But then everything changed

I became a leader, then a manager, and suddenly I lost all my tools.

Interacting with people and making decisions that affect them, is complex.

I was looking for something that can help me like design patterns or unit tests while programming.

I found mental models, which can be defined as shortcuts for our thinking.
Like design patterns, or principles of system design that point out how to structure our thinking to get better results.

There are many mental models, some are more useful than the others, but these are just helpers, tools to make your decision better. I’m discovering and writing about them. I covered 25 different ones so far in my newsletter over the last 18 months.

There are a few essentials that can help you right away.

I'll start with my favourite one.

It’s 2022 I’m head of the Ruby on Rails department having a few senior leaders and a bunch of technical leaders. I invite them all to the workshop to focus on one important issue.

I start with the purpose of our brainstorming:

How to make our developers unhappy and miserable at work?

Imagine their puzzled faces… but soon I start explain::

We'll use inversion, it's a mental model where we literally invert the definition, so instead of asking how to make developers happy, we'll discuss how to make them unhappy.

Why is it so useful?

During that brainstorming we listed everything that we should avoid, like cutting their budgets, forbidding them to have knowledge sharing sessions, or force them to use a new tool every week.

Inversion is not helping directly with finding the best solutions, but is your assurance to understand what you should avoid at any cost.

It's relatively easy to apply, but you need to remember to use it, it’s not something which comes naturally.

I try to “invert” when I have any kind of dilemma, and it gives valuable feedback.

What should I do to make this presentation boring?
Put as much as you can on slides and make it long!
Have a boring monotone voice, same volume, etc.

Some mental models are representations of rules taken from different domains, like physics, chemistry or biology.

My second favorite is Inertia, an example drawn from Physics.

Inertia keeps things moving — if not disturbed by friction or any external force, they will keep moving, that's Newton's First Law of Motion.

It's a tendency to resist changes in a state of motion.
We can use it as an analogy for our actions while leading developers.

Do you keep executing the same old processes even if they do not serve the purpose? — or stopping introducing new things because activation energy is too high?

I had a few old processes like the whole unit meeting. It was abandoned because there was no one to take ownership over it, and by inertia it became deactivated.

Evaluating the actions or old processes that you are taking can help with breaking the inertia.

You may use it to evaluate your team.
Are they driven by inertia or are they constantly experimenting and aren't afraid of trying new things?

You can read more about mental models in the article on manager dot dev : https://newsletter.manager.dev/p/mental-models-for-engineering-managers

Using mental models won't make you smarter, same as knowing all the design patterns or being great at system design theory won't make you a great engineer.

We learn by doing, in this case by thinking and using these models in practice.

There are two pillars of Clear Thinking I'd like to introduce before we move to discussing dilemmas.

It's 1. learning from your decisions
and 2. making decisions in a structured way.

What I do before making important decisions is writing it down.

It's making "invisible visible", if you make decisions in a team, that's a great great place to be literally "on the same page".

When we have documented our decisions it’s much easier to learn from them.

Writing your thoughts helps with distillation of what you have in your head, speaking ideas out loud helps too, but writing has the advantage of editing and iterating fast.

Write down as much as you know, and list all the possibilities. It helps with preventing hindsight bias.

When working on dilemmas we'll use templates to make sure it's documented, we'll fill it after our discussions. 

Now, we are going to evaluate dilemmas that you kindly proposed

For each we'll use a template, but if possible I'll try to think of a mental model that might be useful in examining it, and shortly introduce it.


Dilemma Copy:


During Lesson 5 we'll put what we learned into practice.

We want to use real examples, to help you solve current challenges.

What challenges are you facing now?

Write down your dilemma using simple sentence, and give as much context as you want:

for example:


Dillema: How to handle a persistent underperformer on the team?

We’are not recording Lesson 5 to make sure all the dilemmas can be discussed openly.

---

#general channel:
Thanks for the first day!
On the third day (Lesson 5), we’ll have the most interactive session, where we’ll put what we’ve learned into practice.
To help you solve challenges you face right now, we want to seed the session with real examples:
What challenges are you facing right now? (Please answer in the thread)
Give as much context as you like.
A one-sentence explanation is good enough, but the more you add, the better we can discuss it.

Deadline: We are gathering dilemmas until 9am (GMT, 7 hours before the lesson) on Wednesday. Together with Anton, we'll preprocess and select the dilemmas before the live session, and during the session, we'll invite everyone to join an open discussion.
There might not be enough time to go through all of them: we’ll pick the ones that optimize for learning from the dilemma, but we’ll share our thoughts on every dilemma you submit outside of the live session.
We’re not recording Lesson 5 to ensure all dilemmas can be discussed openly.

IN THREAD >>>
Here is an example:
Dilemma: Should I fire an underperforming engineer from my team?
Context: The engineer was hired one year ago and performed very well until the last three months. Since then, his performance has been declining. However, he was responsible for rewriting an important legacy section, and the team relies on his memory.


COLLECTED DILLEMAS:


Feedbacks — behaviour stuff
Hurting their ego
People like to be liked by others


L1+L2 (from chat)
Feedback Timing and Delivery
Should feedback be given publicly or privately?
Joe Woodhouse: "Praise in public, criticise in private, maybe?"
Is it ever acceptable to criticize in public?
Anton Zaides: "I think sometimes it's ok to criticize in public too, if you do it right and in sensitive way"
Should junior employees receive softened feedback versus seniors direct feedback?
Yuliia Sherenkova: "I personally believe that the more senior the person is, the more straightforward the feedback should be"
How should multiple pieces of feedback be managed without overwhelming someone?
Manoj: "Do you recommend any methods of delivery if you have multiple feedbacks?"
What if the employee receiving feedback doesn’t care?
Pietro Lerro: "What if they just don’t care?"
How to handle very sensitive feedback (like hygiene)?
Joe Woodhouse: "we had a team member with hygiene problems to the point where it intruded on ability to work with/near them. No-one else wanted to be the one to bring it up. Absolutely that's one I took them aside in private for."
Anton Zaides: "Definitely one in private. I think it's a common one in case of bad breath - I had a similar one, VERY hard to say anything about it. But you are doing them a huge favor!"
Pietro Lerro: "I had the same problem, but I wasn’t a manager. I reported to hr -.-‘"
Christina Åhrling: "What a nightmare feedback to have to deliver 😅"
Should feedback always be softened (e.g., “sandwich” method) or be bluntly honest?
Yuliia Sherenkova: "bullshit sandwich, old but gold 😄"
Manoj: "Tried this few times, sometimes the real feedback gets lost. 😄"
Eddi Sanchez: "Never heard it called BS sandwich!"
Cultural Differences in Feedback
Do cultural differences affect how direct or public feedback should be?
Christina Åhrling: "What an interesting discussion on public feedback. I’m also used to the ‘praise in public, criticise in private’ school. I think there might be a cultural aspect here as well though?"
Anton Zaides: "Yes, for sure. I believe in different cultures it'll be much harder. Still, it can always start small. Usually in those cultures the psychological safety is also lower - it's more hierarchical"
Deadlines and Commitments
What if deadlines are communicated late in the process?
Pietro Lerro: "You communicate when you’ll deliver after the feature is almost completed :)"
What if self-set deadlines are missed frequently?
Greg Palian: "I've still seen devs miss those deadlines - they say something will be ready by the end of the day but it takes until the end of next day for example."
Should scope be cut to meet external or internal deadlines?
Christina Åhrling: "Or I make sure we cut enough scope to deliver on time 😅"
Anton Zaides: "In this case I would recommend to cut scope as much as you can, and climb the hill as soon as you can, and raise flags."
How to handle externally imposed deadlines (promised by sales/marketing without engineering input)?
Greg Palian: "What if deadlines are imposed from the outside?"
Greg Palian: "Due to deals with customers done outside of the teams"
Pietro Lerro: "Let’s say: A customer is asking for a feature, the marketing team took time and didn’t pass the need. Now the customer is angry and wants the feature for yesterday"
Greg Palian: "In my case it's more like: A feature was promised to a customer by a set date. The team can plan how to deliver the feature in that time, but we cannot set how long it will take overall"
Anton Zaides: "Yeah, it's a hard one. My focus would be to how avoid it in the future [...] In that scenario the only think you can do it deliver as fast as you can in my experience 😅"
Should teams avoid commitments altogether?
Joe Woodhouse: "I once saw a place with literally zero commitments. Eng threw features over the fence without notice. I don't know how they stayed in business."
Communication and Team Dynamics
How frequently should teams hold meetings?
Pietro Lerro: "Once every two weeks, with a talk to be given by one of them. Ended up with complaint ‘we do too much meetings’ 🙁"
Greg Palian: "Never", "Once a year maybe"
Andy.Powell: "Almost never ☹️"
Eugene Sergueev: "Every two weeks, but stopped recently"
Sebastian: "Once per week, half an hour each Friday, 'eng town hall'"
angelo: "Every month … usually after 2 sprints"
Manoj: "Once a week on Friday"
Everton Yoshitani: "Weekly multi times for different topics and goals"
How to communicate sensitive issues without pointing at individuals?
Pietro Lerro: "Maybe one can bring the critic in public without pointing to a specific person, but that would allow everyone to create a ‘common sense’ like 'when you come to office, you need to wash yourself’"
Should engineers start next-sprint tasks early, or should they strictly follow sprint planning?
Pietro Lerro: "I had a PM that always got angry if the team started working on next-sprint issues XD"
Handling Performance and Fit
Should inability to accept feedback be considered a firing-level issue?
Joe Woodhouse: "Unpopular opinion: ability to take feedback calmly and professionally is a core of almost every job. If they can't do this: they can't do the job. PIP and fire if they won't/can't change. They are negative productivity & impact."



Pietro will share one about Senior Leadership (he’s age case, young and too positive




)
